This podcast is supported by the Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, one of America's
leading research medical schools.
Icahn Mount Sinai is the academic arm of
the eight-hospital Mount Sinai Health System in
New York City.
It's consistently among the top recipients of NIH
funding.
Researchers at Icahn Mount Sinai have made breakthrough
discoveries in many fields vital to advancing the
health of patients, including cancer, COVID and long
COVID, cardiology, neuroscience and artificial intelligence.
The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
we find a way.
This is a science podcast for November 17th,
2023.
I'm Sarah Crespi.
First up this week, have you been talking
to Alexa about the weather lately?
Staff writer, Paul Vucin, joins us to discuss
how artificial intelligence is suddenly and shockingly good
at forecasting the weather, using way fewer resources
than other modeling systems.
Next, we're focusing on municipal solid waste, things
like landfills, composting centers, garbage dumps, and how
these sites may offer a more straightforward path
to lower carbon emissions.
Researcher Zengxuan Hui discusses his science paper on
this overlooked source of methane and some plausible
solutions for reducing these emissions.
I used to live in a large metropolitan
area and one of the big city perks
that I enjoyed the most was that there
was a daily weather blog run by experts,
including meteorologists, just talking about the weather for
the day, giving in-depth explanations of what
I was seeing out my window or what
happened last night.
And I learned a lot, and I learned
a lot about some weather phenomena on the
podcast.
I do know we have about a 10
-day forecast range with some certainty, and we're
pretty darn good at six days of forecasting,
six days out, and that there are competing
models used to make these type of predictions.
But now there's a new modeler in town.
This week, staff writer Paul Vucin wrote about
AI's contribution to weather forecasting and the surprising
leaps these systems are making in predictive power.
Hi, Paul.
Welcome back to the Science Podcast.
Hi, good to be here.
I know all of us have been taken
off guard at some point by improvements in
AI, you know, whether it's writing an email
or predicting protein structures, but I hate to
say it, weather was not on my radar.
Did you see this coming, Paul, this leap
in forecasting by AI?
You know, I don't think a lot of
people saw it coming if you go back
even two, two and a half years ago.
People had been trying this five years ago,
and it just didn't seem like it worked
that well.
And then all of a sudden, it did
work.
There are modelers out there using supercomputers, basically,
to put out forecasts.
They're using math and measurements and physics.
And this has improved over the years, kind
of at a large cost, like in terms
of computing power.
And now these AI models are turning out
pretty competitive results.
You know, how do they stack up?
How do the European model and the AI
modelers, how do they compare?
Yeah, so the European Weather Forecasting Agency is
the top performer in the world.
And they use these very physically based models
that ingest all the observations from satellites and
everything, and then solve all the equations of
fluid motion on a little grid that stimulates
the entire atmosphere.
So that's the top in class.
Now, these kind of AI models are matching
the top weather forecasting model or exceeding it.
In some cases, 90% of the different
metrics looked at over a 10-day forecast.
Right.
And what are they doing differently?
Well, so fundamentally, these have been trained by
the weather models.
They take the data, the weather data that
has been run through these models.
And they've been doing this now for 40
years.
So they take this gigantic data set, they
ingest it.
And I mean, this is classic deep learning,
but on a very kind of large scale
over a graph versus, you know, like an
image type processing.
They're not solving equations.
They're just learning patterns really over a very
complex incomprehensible scale to us in this black
box.
And it's spitting out what should come next.
This is what we see with the ones
that write emails for us.
They have this huge corpus that they've studied.
It has a really good model for saying,
that's the word that comes next in an
email.
That's the most likely next word and doing
that at the paragraph scale or doing it
at the global scale for weather.
Are all the models that are out there,
all the different AIs because there's not just
one company or one academic institution working on
this.
Are they all doing the same thing or
are there, should we lump them all together
or are some of them different than others?
You know, I would lump them.
Okay.
There are differences in architecture, but as these
have gotten big enough and as long as
you have enough computing power to throw at
the start, enough data, it doesn't seem to
matter that much.
You know, it's kind of 1%, 2%
differences.
You can have different approaches, but really in
the end you're getting to about the same
place.
Right.
We should talk about computing power here.
I mentioned supercomputers being involved in the forecasting
that's been done for the past 40 years.
That's not what happens when you've already trained
your model and now you want to, you
know, have an AI in your newsroom.
It doesn't need multiple banks of servers and
processors.
Nope.
It just needs one fancy desktop computer that's
designed for running these type of models and
it can run it in one minute versus
say two hours for a gigantic supercomputer.
What does that mean?
Like how does that change the world?
I feel like it should, but maybe I
don't need to model weather in my house.
You don't need to model weather in your
house.
What is the impact here?
I mean, the impact is going to be
more for these weather agencies, you know, who
are really starting to look at this closely.
Right now they run these models a lot
of times over, 50 times the European model
is run as slightly a higher or lower
resolution.
Every six hours, they kind of do this
over and over four times a day.
And that kind of running it over and
over gives you some more sense of the
possibility in the future because, you know, butterfly
effect and chaos in the atmosphere, that's all
super expensive.
If they're able to figure out how to
make these AI models first able to continue
to verify that they are fit for purpose
and all the different ways that are needed
and establish some trust in them, you can
maybe start kind of doing this a lot
more cheaply.
Maybe that's just less CO2 emissions from what
you're running, or you can kind of devote
that computing power to solving other problems like
how to better ingest all this weather data
or things like that.
Yeah.
Speaking of ingesting, do we need to training
these AI models?
Do they need to keep refining their predictions?
Yeah, they would certainly have to periodically update
these.
This Google DeepMind model that is in science
this week, they ran, it took like four
weeks on their dedicated machines to train it.
So, you know, it's something you can see
it theoretically doing every year without being a
huge issue.
We're talking about weather here, you know, what
happens day to day, but could an AI
like this model climate change, make predictions about
climate change?
Yeah.
So climate is a totally different issue in
many ways because the past, this data we
have, is not necessarily predictive of the future
of the climate.
You know, we're changing things a lot.
There are things in the future, ice sheets
melting, things collapsing that just wouldn't be in
the training data.
So it would be very difficult to trust
these projections going forward.
But there are ways that it could be
very helpful where you can take these climate
models.
There's this new class of climate model that
runs in super high resolutions, directly recreating lots
of stuff in the atmosphere.
And we can only afford to run this
on supercomputers for a few years at a
time.
It's kind of slowly pushing out.
So you get that running long enough, and
then you can train the AI on that
and run it a bunch of times.
And then you really start to get a
lot more value from all that computing power
that you've poured into it.
So there's a lot of promise there.
Are we going to stop doing the numerical
modeling, you know, using physics, using measurement to
make forecasts?
Not anytime in the near future.
We have a lot of trust in this
numerical weather modeling.
And you know, if the AI is a
black box, there's that question of how far
do you trust it?
Also, these numerical weather models are producing the
data sets that the AI is being trained
on.
There's kind of, you can't get there without
that.
There's some theoretical future where perhaps the AI
can start ingesting the satellite data directly, or
all the sensor data directly, and take it
end to end.
But we are very far away from that,
I believe.
Or maybe we're just two years away.
Who knows?
Okay.
What will AI do next?
How is it going to affect your beat
next, Paul?
What area is it going to affect?
It's filtering in lots of ways.
I mean, the image recognition parts of it
are just almost unremarkable at this point, where
like, oh, this can spot icebergs better.
It's like, yeah, you know, of course, again,
anything that's a visual learning type of thing.
I'll have another story in a few weeks
that will also be about AI and satellites,
and look out for that.
That's great.
Okay.
Well, thank you so much for coming on
the show, Paul.
I appreciate it.
Yeah, thank you.
Paul Vucin is a staff writer for Science.
You can find a link to the story
and a related science paper at science.org
slash podcast.
Stay tuned for a big steaming pile of
science.
Researchers Zengxuan Hui talks about modeling landfill emissions
on a global scale.
We don't think about garbage enough.
According to a paper this week in Science,
global municipal waste is a missed opportunity for
reducing emissions and meeting climate goals.
Zengxuan Hui is an author on the article,
and he's here to talk about it.
Hi, Hui.
Welcome to the Science Podcast.
Hi, thanks for having me.
Oh, sure.
So how is the landfill in my town
or in your town related to climate change
and emissions?
Why is it a carbon source?
Solid waste are actually made up of a
large variety of compositions.
It is made up of, for example, food
waste, paper waste, plastic waste, and so on.
So the organic content in waste decomposes and
predominantly generates methane gas, making solid waste one
of the top methane and methane sectors in
the world.
And methane is an even stronger greenhouse gas
than carbon dioxide.
Yeah.
So methane is a potent greenhouse gas that
traps significantly higher amounts of heat than that
of carbon dioxide.
So for example, let's consider a scenario where
we have two different sources of emissions, one
releasing methane and the other releasing carbon dioxide
in the same quantities over 20 years.
The methane emission will trap 80 times more
heat than the carbon dioxide emissions over those
20 years.
And this emphasizes the urgency of addressing methane
emission to effectively mitigate short-term climate change.
Yeah.
So we do hear a lot about reducing
emissions from things like energy sources, like going
solar, or reducing emissions from cars by switching
to electrical vehicles.
There are a lot of sources of carbon
out there.
Why is it important to focus on municipal
waste, garbage, landfills, that kinds of thing?
I think solid waste management is a powerful
but overlooked climate solution.
Some may perceive waste management as a relatively
minor contributor to overall greenhouse gas emissions, like
compared to the big boys such as energy
and transportation.
But we may be undermining its climate impact
because the major greenhouse gas emissions from solid
waste is methane.
And methane actually traps significantly higher amounts of
heat than carbon dioxide.
So in your paper, you attempted to quantify
this, to count up to some extent how
much is coming off of these sources for
carbon emissions.
Can you talk a little bit about what
timescale you looked at and how you counted
this up?
We forecasted the business as usual greenhouse gas
emissions that would be emitted from the solid
waste sector from 2021 until 2050.
After we did this forecast, we actually tried
to explore whether there are any technical and
financially plausible mitigation strategies within the solid waste
management, and we visualized them into future emissions
pathway as well.
So what are some of the ways that
we could cut back on emissions from landfills,
from solid waste?
Yeah, so we understand that every country faces
a unique and exclusive version of this challenge
to improve their solid waste management.
And it is important to propose mitigation strategies
based on their diverse situation regarding its required
costs, technology readiness, skilled worker requirements, and their
standing in the waste management hierarchy.
So considering these requirements, we explored four individual
mitigation strategies for reducing emissions from the solid
waste sector.
So firstly, it is retrofitting landfills with biogas
capture.
Secondly, diverting organic waste for composting.
Thirdly, diverting organic waste for anaerobic digestion.
And lastly, reducing waste generation by 50%
relative to 2020 levels.
Okay, so looking across these four different scenarios,
some of these are more social or behavioral
interventions.
I'm thinking, you know, reducing how much waste
we create in the first place or sorting
out trash from compost.
Others are more technological.
And these are things that you're talking about,
like retrofitting landfills to capture methane.
Or another kind of technical intervention is these
biogas digesters.
So you basically digest compost with microbes and
then you get that methane.
And either the retrofitted landfill methane or the
digest methane, that can be burned as fuel,
which is, you know, a less carbon-intense
approach than just releasing the atmosphere.
You know, when you calculate across all these
different waste situations that countries have, who fits
best with what?
Like, who should be doing which of these
things to get the most benefit from these
strategies?
Our findings found that high-income countries should
prioritize reducing their waste volume and lower-income
countries should prioritize managing their organic waste more
sustainably.
This is because lower-income countries generally tend
to generate waste compositions with a higher organic
content, as opposed to high-income countries.
But generally speaking, the two levers that we
identified for minimizing greenhouse gas emissions from global
solid waste system is firstly, to reduce the
waste volume being generated.
And secondly, managing organic waste more sustainably.
And if these were maximized, if this was
something that people did and took on, how
much reduction could we potentially see in emissions
from solid waste?
These proposed mitigation strategies by themselves would be
able to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that
would be emitted and cumulated in the atmosphere
in the next 30 years by 27 to
70 percent relative to business as usual.
Okay, so how does that translate into the
1.5 degree limit that we're trying to
stay under?
Staying within the 1.5 degree Celsius limit
requires adopting more than one strategy.
But we find that if we adopt multiple
strategies, including retrofitting landfills, composting our organic waste
and halving our waste generation, could actually prevent
overshooting the Paris Agreement temperature limits.
What's more interesting is this will also result
in a global solid waste system with net
zero warming relative to 2020 levels.
In other words, no further warming is induced
compared to 2020 levels.
Let's talk about the Global Methane Pledge.
I think most people are familiar with climate
agreements, but maybe they haven't heard about this
other one about methane.
Methane was determined to be of particular importance
at the 26th United Nations Climate Change Conference
of the Parties because it has a short
lifetime of approximately one decade, so cutting its
emission can rapidly decelerate near-term global warming.
So more than 100 countries come together to
sign the Global Methane Pledge, aiming to curb
30% of global methane emission by 2030
using a 2020 level baseline.
How does this help with that?
We actually look into whether the mitigation strategies
that we propose can actually help us to
achieve the Global Methane Pledge.
Well, it's actually achievable, but there's a catch.
Because we designed these mitigation strategies only to
be fully adopted by 2050, so it cannot
actually reduce 30% of methane emission from
the solid waste sector in a timely manner.
We will actually need to accelerate the complete
adoption of mitigation strategies by at least 9
to 17 years, which is to completely adopt
all these strategies by 2033 to 2044, depending
on the mitigation strategies, in order for us
to be on track with the progress to
achieve the Global Methane Pledge.
Kind of the surprise here, I think, besides
the fact that this is such an impactful
intervention, is that all the technologies that you're
talking about are already in existence, so they
don't rely on a bunch of innovations to,
you know, say, take carbon out of the
air or invent a new kind of battery.
It's just, do these things we already know
how to do?
What do you see as the hurdles to
getting this to happen?
So the good thing is these technologies are
actually readily available technologies, but to realize an
efficient waste management system, policymakers need to utilize
three types of policy tools to also promote
people to actually do these kinds of things.
I want to highlight that the first one
is direct regulation, which is encompassing laws to
be enforced rigorously, such as mandating waste segregation
in each household.
Secondly, economic incentive and disincentive to encourage reduction
in waste generation and increase recycling efforts.
And thirdly, social tools, such as the promotion
of education campaigns to inculcate environmental values in
communities to generate less waste.
Thank you so much, Hoi.
Thank you.
Happy to be on here.
Zhang Xuan Hoi was a MPhil graduate student
at the time that this research was conducted
at the New Energy Science and Engineering Department
at Xiamen University in Malaysia.
You can find a link to the paper
we discussed at science.org slash podcast.
And that concludes this edition of the Science
Podcast.
If you have any comments or suggestions, write
to us at sciencepodcast at aaas.org.
To find us on the apps, search for
Science Magazine.
Or you can listen to the show on
our website, science.org slash podcast.
This show was edited by me, Sarah Crespi,
and Kevin MacLean with production help from Podigy.
Jeffrey Cook composed the music on behalf of
Science and its publisher, AAAS.
Thanks for joining us.